It this video will look at the syntax for accessing individual vector elements.
The first way to access vector elements is to use the array syntax we've already learned using the subscript
operator.
That's the square brackets we use the name of the vector followed by the square brackets with the index
of the vector element we want inside the square brackets.
For example test scores one refers to the element at index 1 in the test scores vector in the code example
at the bottom you can see that the syntax is exactly as it was for a race.
Remember that vector subscripting or indexing is the same as in arrays.
It starts at zero.
So the first element of an array is at index 0.
It's important to understand when we use the subscript operator with a vector.
No bounds checking will be done.
You have to do it yourself as with a race.
Let's look at another way of accessing vector elements.
We can also access vector elements.
You see the AT method.
This is the vector syntax since when we create a vector we're really creating an object in object oriented
jargon.
Then we can ask objects to perform operations.
These operations are called methods.
The syntax is simple the object name.
In this case the name of the vector followed by a dot called the dot operator followed by the name of
the operation we want performed.
This is the method name.
Don't worry about the jargon for now it will come before you know it and will cover it in depth.
When we talk about object oriented programming the C++ vector has a method or operation called at a
T.
So you can ask the vector to give you an element at a specific position which you provide inside the
parentheses.
This is actually much more intuitive since the name at provides context.
So in the example we've declared and initialized the vector named test scores to the 5 integers one
hundred ninety five ninety nine.
87 and 88 if we want to access a specific element we use the method and provide the element index.
You can see that the syntax is very easy to read and understand.
Test scores at 0 will refer to the first element in the vector that element at position 0.
We can also use the same syntax when we want to modify vector elements in this example.
We're reading 5 integers from the console and storing these elements into the test scores vector.
The last statement is an assignment statement as we saw with a raise.
We're storing 90 into the first element of the test scores vector.
You're probably thinking OK that's pretty easy.
Vector's is just as easy to use as arrays but why do they change in size dynamically.
The vector has a method called pushback that adds a new element to the end of the vector.
Remember all vector elements must be of the same type.
So the element you add must be of the same type as all the other vector elements.
In this example we've created a vector called test scores that contains three integers one hundred ninety
five and ninety nine.
If this were an array and we wanted to add another test score we'd be stuck since arrays are fixed in
size.
However with vectors we can use the pushback method and provide the integer you want to add within the
parentheses.
You can see that I'm asking the test scores vector to push back 80 and then 90.
This will add 80 and then 90 to the end of the vector.
Now the vector will contain five elements one hundred ninety five ninety nine 80 and 90.
How does this work.
You don't have to worry about it.
That's the beauty of vectors and of the other classes in the standard template library.
The vector will take care of allocating or deallocating space adding new values to that space and so
forth.
You can concentrate on solving your problem.
Ok but what happens if you're using ADD or some other vector method and you go out of bounds.
Let's see if you go out of bounds and you're using a method that does bounds checking.
C++ will throw an exception.
That's the jargon used to say that an exceptional condition has been encountered and the program can't
continue an error message is displayed and the program will terminate.
This is a good thing.
Now you have an error message that tells you what the problem was and you could fix it.
The error message in this case is pretty long but it's telling you exactly what happened.
The error message may look different depending on the compiler you have but the information provided
will be the same.
In this case I bolted the important parts of the error message.
You can see out-of range vector range check and the number is 5 and 2.
When you look back at your code you'll see that vector has two elements and you wanted element at index
5.
You want your program to terminate or crash during testing so you can fix errors but you don't want
it to crash in production.
This is where you can do exception handling.
This involves catching these exceptions as the program runs and dealing with them so that the program
doesn't crash.
Exception handling is a more advanced topic but I want to cover the basics.
So there'll be a set of at the end of the course just an exception handling.
I hope you can see how much better vectors are than arrays and why you should use vectors in modern
C++.
Now let's head over to code like and use what we learned and write some code with vectors so now I'm
in code right.
And let's do some examples with vectors.
I'm in the seventh section workspace under the vector's project and here's my main file.
Notice that I'm including the vector include file.
You must do this in order to use vectors also.
Vectors belong to the standard namespace.
So either you use the namespace standard or you will have to do as t d scope resolution operator.
Everywhere you use vectors.
Let's talk about a couple of different ways to create vectors in this first example here.
I can create a vector called vowels.
And it's a vector of characters and that's the syntax.
We put the type inside the angle brackets.
So in this case I've got vowels is a vector of characters and this is an empty vector.
OK it's of size zero there's nothing in there right now.
The only way to add things to it is to do something like push back which would do that a bit.
The second example creates a vector called foules again.
In this case it's five characters long.
And each one is initialized to 0.
This third example here which is the one I'm going to use in this example.
I'm using an initializer list here so I'm initializing the vector vowels which is again is a vector
of characters to the characters a.
Oh you which are my vowels again remember that the character literals have single quotes around them
not double quotes.
So at this point I can simply output vowels Sub-Zero a Volvo for which I expect to predict a and you
respectively notice that even though I'm using a vector I'm using the array syntax so it's very very
familiar.
Also remember that using the subscript notation does not do bounds checking.
OK so let me run this.
So this is my sample run.
There's my lower case.
My lower case you just expect.
All right so now let's take a look at another declaration of vector.
In this first example here I'm creating a vector called test scores which is a vector of integers and
I'm creating a vector of 3 integers.
In this case all of them will be initialized to zero in the second example.
I'm creating the test scores vector again.
Obviously I have to comment them out.
You can't use the same name twice.
That's why I'm doing this.
It's a vector of integers three of them.
Each one is initialized to 100.
And so those are two variants for constructing these vector objects.
That one I'm going to use is this one right here where I'm saying.
Test scores again is a vector of integers and I'm initializing them to 100.
98 in 89.
So in this case I'm going to get exactly three elements in my vector my vector will be of size 3.
OK so let's comment this out here.
And in this case I expect it to display 198 and 89.
Again here I'm using the array syntax.
So let me run this.
And there you go one hundred ninety eight eighty nine using array syntax.
Now we can also use vector syntax so let me and comment this in here you can see I'm saying test scores
dot at zero.
Test scores at one test scores at two.
So in this case I'm using the at method to give me the value at that specific index.
Same idea except that this is a method and this will be bounced checked which is very important to understand.
Also after I print out those three numbers I'm saying there are so many scores in the vector.
OK so what does that mean.
Well notice the size method here.
This is a method in the vector class.
So I can have my vector name and I can say something like that size.
It's that simple.
And this will return however many items are in the vector right now.
Right now I have three of them.
So I expect this to say there are three scores in the vector.
Remember the vector can grow and shrink dynamically.
So it's important to be able to ask it hey how big are you.
That's what the size method does.
So I'll run this one more time and you can see here my test scores using array syntax 198 89.
Now my test scores using the vector syntax 198 89.
We expect that because the vector hasn't changed.
But here it says there are three scores in the vector.
So here we're asking the vector hey how big are you.
What's your size.
And it's returning a 3.
In this example here.
But we're going to do is we're going to actually put some information into the vector.
We're going to use the vector syntax to this point forward.
So here I'm saying two or three test scores and then I'm grabbing three integers from the console and
I'm putting the first one at zero.
The second one at one and the third one too.
So I'm changing those vector elements.
And then I just want to display them out again.
So I come at this.
OK so let's do that build and run again.
Right now we've got 198 and 89 in there.
So let's just say I want 10 20 and 30 and I want to display them out.
There you go.
Updated test scores is 10 20 and 30.
So you can see that we've actually changed the contents of those vector elements.
Now let's talk a little bit about the dynamic nature of vectors.
This is the part this really really cool.
I'm going to uncomment this spit out here
and notice the code here it says enter a test score to add to the vector remember the vector at this
point has three elements in it.
I need to read this into some variable.
So I've created a simple variable right here called skorts you add.
It's just an integer.
This is not a vector.
This is not an array.
This is just a plain old integer variable initializing it to zero that's the best practice.
And I'm reading an integer from the keyboard from the user and putting it into score to add then what
I'm going to do is I'm going to tell the test scores vector to push that integer at the back of the
vector.
So what's going to add it to the vector if the vector needs to increase in size.
It will.
That's nothing we have to do handles that automatically that I'm going to say enter one more test score.
So I've read another test score from the console and I'll push that score on.
So at this point when we display we should have five integers.
Now in the vector I'm going to display them all at 0 1 2 3 and 4 and then I'm going to say hey test
scores what's your size and I expect the five here.
OK so let's try that so when I try my test scores again I'll say 10 20 and 30.
Now remember our vector contains three integers right now 10 20 and 30.
So let's enter a test score to add let's add a 100.
Now I would say Give me one more.
Let's put in five.
Maybe I got some extra credit.
Now when I press center I should expect to see five integers displayed as well as the size of the vector
not being 5.
So I'm going to press center and that's exactly what I see.
The test scores are 10 20 30 100 105.
Then it says there are enough five scores in the vector.
That's pretty cool.
Let me show you an example of an exception right here I'm saying this should cause an exception because
I'm trying to access test scores at 10 if I tried to do something like this and just used a race syntax
like that.
No bounds checking will happen.
I might just get a crash with no error message or anything.
Instead I'm actually saying at 10 and we could try to put a new line it's not going to matter much because
it's not going to do that because there is no tempo element.
Let me run this again and I'll go into those numbers again.
OK so a gamble set 10 20 30 that's pushing 100 and 105.
Now we should get an exception and there's the exception.
You can see the program still stopping.
But there's my exception terminate called after throwing an instance of out of range.
There's a range checking problem which is it 10 in disguise five big.
So that gives you a really really good clue as to what's going on.
Right.
I'm going to comment that out so it won't affect us again.
And then the last thing we'll do is I'll show you an example of using a two dimensional vector uncomment.
All of this.
All right.
So here how do we declare a two dimensional vector Well a two dimensional vector is a vector of vectors.
So it's a vector of vectors and this is how we declare a vector vectors.
I want to declare a vector that contains within it not it's not floats not doubles but a vector.
In this case a vector of integers and that's my movie ratings.
I can initialise them right here.
So going horizontally that would be the first reviewer The second reviewer The third reviewer and going
vertically this would be the first movie the second movie the third movie in the fourth movie.
Now just like I showed you in the slides with the Rays I can use array syntax so I could say here the
movie ratings for review are number one using a syntax and I would expect this to print out 1 2 3 4.
That's the first reviewer right up here.
And in order to use vector syntax we just use add but we use it twice.
Give me the rating at zero.
That gives me this guy.
And then once I have that guy I can take at zero for him or at one and the next line and so forth.
So if I run this I would expect to see one two three four both times so let's run it and we'll get by
this part one more time.
And there you go.
Here the movie Ready's reviewed over one array syntax.
One two three four.
Here the movie ratings prove you were number two.
Number one again.
That's right.
Using vector syntax.
One two three four.
OK so that basically covers the fundamentals of vectors.
How to use them there's so much more effect and we'll talk about all of that when we talk about the
standard template library.
But congratulations you've just now created objects used to object methods and we're on the way to object
oriented programming.